Production system or production rule system is a computer program typically used to provide some form of artificial intelligence, which consists primarily of a set of rules about behavior but it also includes the mechanism necessary to follow those rules as the system responds to states of the world.


The major components of Production System in Artificial Intelligence are:
 The global database is the central data structure used by the production system in Artificial Intelligence.
 The production rules operate on the global database. Each rule usually has a precondition that is either satisfied or not by the global database. If the precondition is satisfied, the rule is usually be applied. The application of the rule changes the database.
 The control system then chooses which applicable rule should be applied and ceases computation when a termination condition on the database is satisfied. If multiple rules are to fire at the same time, the control system resolves the conflicts.
The main features of the production system include: The structure of each sentence in a production system is unique and uniform as they use the “IF-THEN” structure. This structure provides simplicity in knowledge representation. This feature of the production system improves the readability of production rules. This means the production rule code the knowledge available in discrete pieces. Information can be treated as a collection of independent facts which may be added or deleted from the system with essentially no deleterious side effects. This means the facility for modifying rules. It allows the development of production rules in a skeletal form first and then it is accurate to suit a specific application. The knowledge base of the production system stores pure knowledge. This part does not contain any type of control or programming information. Each production rule is normally written as an English sentence; the problem of semantics is solved by the very structure of the representation.
